---
layout: irispost
title: ALPhA Completes a Successful Virtual Summer Research Program
author: Michelle Kuchera
postimage: /assets/images/posts/20201120-ALPhA-group-meeting.png
postimage-caption: "The ALPhA group during the last group meeting of the summer."
postbanner: /assets/images/posts/20201120-ALPhA-horizontal.png
summary: "ALPhA students completed virtual summer research in collaboration with the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility and the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams."
---

<!--
{% include figure.html
    file="/assets/images/posts/20201120-ALPhA-group-meeting.png"
    alt="Tracking with A Common Tracking Software (ACTS)"
    caption="ALPhAAAAAA"
%}

{% include figure.html
    file="/assets/images/posts//assets/images/posts/20201120-ALPhA-group-meeting.png"
    alt="Extending the Physics Reach of LHCb in Run 3 and Boost-Histogram for Analysis System"
    caption="ALPHA again!"
%}
-->
The CLARIPHY-affiliated Algorithms for Learning in Physics Application (ALPhA) group at Davidson College
completed a successful summer research program with nine undergraduate students from four institutions.
Due to the pandemic, the research was virtual and students resided across the world for their work. The group collaborated
with the detector, accelerator, and Active-Target Time Projection Chamber groups at the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams and the Theory Center
at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility. With laboratories required to stop beam for much of the summer due to the pandemic, increased focus turned towards computational methods, allowing the group to make significant progress over the course of the summer.

## Research Highlights

**Accelerator Physics** In collaboration with the accelerator physics group at FRIB,
ALPhA investigated reinforcement learning for automatic beam tuning.

**QCD Theory** In collaboration with the Theory Center at Jefferson Lab and Old Dominion
University, ALPhA completed portions of an AI-based global analysis framework.



<!-- All the posters from the session are available here:
[IRIS-HEP Poster Session 2020](http://indico.cern.ch/event/894127/) -->

## Dissemination
{% include figure.html
    file="/assets/images/posts/20201120-ALPhA-Landis.png"
    alt="ALPhA research making it's way into living rooms across the country."
    caption="ALPhA presents to living rooms across the USA at the virtual APS Division of Nuclear Physics meeting."
%}

As a testament to a productive summer within these unusual time, four summer students presented their work at the American Physical Society (APS) Division of Nuclear Physics (DNP) annual meeting and PI Michelle Kuchera represented ALPhA as a plenary speaker at the Low-Energy Community Meeting, and an invited speaker at the APS DNP meeting. In addition, five papers from prior ALPhA work were submitted this summer.

### Posters at DNP
* [Using Adversarial Networks to Generate Realistic Structure Function Surfaces](https://youtu.be/fNnh73dxMi8) *Andrew Hoyle, et. al.*
* [Machine learning for improved resolution and fast predictions in a parallel-plate avalanche counter with optical readout (O-PPAC)](https://youtu.be/JcgIZO6W1hw) *Kate Roberts, et. al.*
* [Using neural networks to generate cross section data from theoretical QCD parameters](https://youtu.be/FsuGnnZvWtE) *Rida Shahid, et. al.*
* [Using machine learning techniques to interface between experimental cross sections and QCD theory parameters](https://youtu.be/OiFyJOvWqz0). *Eleni Tsitinidi, et. al.*
* [Machine learning techniques for track analysis in Active-Target Time Projection Chamber data](https://youtu.be/HKw5jeAr498) *Lexie Weghorn, et. al.*

&nbsp;
### Talks
* Machine learning in nuclear physics experiments. DNP. *Michelle Kuchera*
* [Machine Learning in Low-Energy Nuclear Physics](https://indico.frib.msu.edu/event/27/attachments/114/656/Kuchera_ML_LECM2020.pdf). LECM. *Michelle Kuchera*

&nbsp;
## Summer School
{% include figure.html
    file="/assets/images/posts/20201120-TALENT.png"
    alt="ECT* TALENT Summer School students."
    caption="ECT* TALENT Summer School engaged a worldwide community in AI efforts in nuclear physics."
%}
PIs Michelle and Raghu co-organized and co-taught the [ECT* Nuclear TALENT course on Machine Learning and Data Analysis for Nuclear Physics](https://github.com/NuclearTalent/MachineLearningECT). This course is for nuclear physics graduate students and grants course credit to those from European institutions. Due to the pandemic, the school was held remotely, with over 150 participants tuning in from all six inhabitable continents.


<!--
## Papers submitted
* GAN
*
*
*
-->
